===========
Frontmatter
===========

Acknowledgements
================

The most gratifying aspect of working on Django is the community. We've been
especially lucky that Django has attracted such a smart, motivated, and friendly
bunch. A segment of that community followed us over to the online "beta" release
of this book. Their reviews and comments were indispensable; this book wouldn't
have been possible without all that wonderful peer review. Almost a thousand
people left comments that helped us improve the clarity, quality, and flow of
the final book; we'd like to thank each and every one of them.

We're especially grateful to those who took the time to review the book in depth
and left dozens (sometimes hundreds) of comments apiece: Marty Alchin, Max
Battcher, Oliver Beat- tie, Rod Begbie, Paul Bissex, Matt Boersma, Robbin
Bonthond, Peter Bowyer, Nesta Campbell, Jon Colverson, Jeff Croft, Chris Dary,
Alex Dong, Matt Drew, Robert Dzikowski, Nick Efford, Ludvig Ericson, Eric
Floehr, Brad Fults, David Grant, Simon Greenhill, Robert Haveman, Kent Johnson,
Andrew Kember, Marek Kubica, Eduard Kucera, Anand Kumria, Scott Lamb, Fredrik
Lundh, Vadim Macagon, Markus Majer, Orestis Markou, R. Mason, Yasushi Masuda,
Kevin Menard, Carlo Miron, James Mulholland, R.D. Nielsen, Michael O'Keefe,
Lawrence Oluyede, Andreas Pfrengle, Frankie Robertson, Mike Robinson, Armin
Ronacher, Daniel Roseman, Johan Samyn, Ross Shannon, Carolina F. Silva, Paul
Smith, Bj√∂rn Stabell, Bob Stepno, Graeme Stevenson, Justin Stockton, Kevin
Teague, Daniel Tietze, Brooks Travis, Peter Tripp, Matthias Urlichs, Peter van
Kampen, Alexandre Vassalotti, Jay Wang, Brian Will, and Joshua Works.

Many thanks to our technical editor, Jeremy Dunck. Without Jeremy this book
would be littered with errors, inaccuracies, and broken code. We feel very lucky
that someone as talented as Jeremy found the time to help us out.

Specials thanks go to Simon Willison for writing the chapter on form processing.
We really appreciate the help, and we're thrilled that Simon's excellent writing
can be part of this book.

We're grateful for all the hard work the folks at Apress put into this book.
They've been amazingly supportive and patient; this book wouldn't have come
together without a lot of work on their part. We're especially happy that Apress
supported and even encouraged the free release of this book online; it's
wonderful seeing a publisher so embracing the spirit of open source.

Finally, of course, thanks to our friends, families, and coworkers who've
graciously tolerated our mental absence while we finished this work.

About the Authors
=================

**Adrian Holovaty**, a Web developer/journalist, is one of the creators and core
developers of Django. He is the founder of EveryBlock, a local news Web startup.
When not working on Django improvements, Adrian hacks on side projects for the
public good, such as chicagocrime.org, one of the original Google Maps mashups.
He lives in Chicago and maintains a weblog at `holovaty.com`__.

__ http://holovaty.com/

**Jacob Kaplan-Moss** is one of the lead developers of Django. At his day job,
he's the lead developer for the Lawrence Journal-World, a locally-owned
newspaper in Lawrence, KS where Django was developed. At the Journal-World,
Jacob oversees development of Ellington, an online news publishing platforms for
media companies. He can be found online at `jacobian.org`__.

__ http://jacobian.org/

About the Technical Reviewer
============================

**Jeremy Dunck** is the lead developer of Pegasus News, a personalized local
site based in Dallas, Texas. An early contributor to Greasemonkey and Django, he
sees technology as a tool for communication and access to knowledge.